import { Metadata } from "next"
export const metadata: Metadata = {
    title: "Dispelling the Android CSS Animation Myths",
}

**Update:** it turns out Android 4.0
[actually addresses](http://yfrog.com/h346935364p) this issue. Still, we need to
urge the authors of these resources to explicitly mention that full support
isn't available in previous versions of Android.

We live in good times as web developer/designers. There are more fantastic
resources available today than there ever have been - we have websites like
[QuirksMode](http://www.quirksmode.org/), [Can I Use?](http://caniuse.com/), and
the recent [Mobile HTML5](http://mobilehtml5.org/) to tell us what features we
can expect to use on a myriad of operating systems, browsers and mobile devices.
Super! But there's a recurring theme across all of these websites. They all tell
us that Android _fully supports CSS animations._

**That's crazy talk, Dan!** I hear you say. Open up any Android 2.0+ device and
check out this [feature detection page.](http://daneden.me/labs/featuretest/)
Sitting, quite proudly, will be the words "css animation" -
[Modernizr](http://modernizr.com) says it's fully supported.So over you go to
your CSS file and pump in a bunch of amazing CSS animations to make your website
fly. Back to the Droid we go, and what do we find?

We find absolutely nothing.

Here's the thing: CSS animations are supported by Android devices - but **only
if a single property is changed.** As soon as you try to animate more than one
property at once, the entire element disappears. In non-native Android browsers,
the element will be visible for the duration of the animation, but will hide
immediately after it's finished. This is true for (as far as I know) all Android
devices below 4.0. Testing for 4.0 is yet to be done.

So what can we do? Well, if you're only animating a single property, such as
opacity or transform, that's fine. Nothing to worry about. However, for more
than one property, you'll need to put each of the properties into their own
keyframe declaration. Here's a handy example:

```css
@-webkit-keyframes myAnimation {
    from {
        opacity: 0;
        -webkit-transform: translateY(-20px);
    }

    to {
        opacity: 1;
        -webkit-transform: translateY(0);
    }
}
```

That animation won't work. But, if we put each property into it's own keyframe
declaration, it will work.

```css
@-webkit-keyframes a-opacity {
    from {
        opacity: 0;
    }
    to {
        opacity: 1;
    }
}

@-webkit-keyframes a-transform {
    from {
        -webkit-transform: translateY(-20px);
    }
    to {
        -webkit-transform: translateY(0);
    }
}
```

This, my friends, is a very real and serious issue. The Android browser will
always claim to support CSS animation. The compatibility charts will also praise
Android for it's support. Web authors will write WebKit specific CSS animations
which will work great on WebKit browsers - except on Android, where any content
within the animated element will never see the light of day. There's no way
around it, other than UA sniffing, which is undesirable to say the least.

What needs to happen, more than anything at this stage, is for people to raise
awareness of this issue. I hope this gets as far as the authors of sites such as
Can I Use?, Modernizr et al so that we can make sure people are aware of the
issue. Tread with caution, animation authors - and help spread the word!
