export const metadata = {
    title: "Do Less",
    description:
        "How can you create more value with fewer resources? The answer is simple: do less.",
    openGraph: {
        title: "Do Less",
        description:
            "How can you create more value with fewer resources? The answer is simple: do less.",
        images: [
            {
                url: "/og/do-less",
            },
        ],
    },
}

# Do Less

As I’m writing this post, I’m getting ready to publish my most recent app,
[Ora](/portfolio/ora), to the App Store. Ora is a funny project, since it took
me over a year to get it into a shippable state—but for most of that time, I
didn’t touch the codebase at all. I stopped working on it in June of 2024, and
when I opened it again in January of 2025, I spent most of my time **removing**
features from the app.

The benefit of stepping away from the work was the clarity and confidence to
remove all the parts that no longer seemed so important. Being able to see your
friends’ time zones, recurring alarms, Live Activities and calendar events—all
this seemed like cruft that only delayed the launch of an app that was ready
months before it was “finished”.

At the same time, Meta, the company I work for at the time of writing, is going
through a period of intensity. In fact, 2025 has been dubbed the
“[year of intensity](https://www.businessinsider.com/meta-low-performers-cut-employee-reaction-mark-zuckerberg#:~:text='Year%20of%20intensity'%3A%20Meta,plans%20to%20cut%20low%20performers&text=Meta%20said%20in%20internal%20memos,a%20%22pretty%20rough%22%20week)”
at Meta in the media. Intensity comes in many forms, but in tech, it usually
means doing more with less resources.

After almost 9 years at Meta, I’ve found that the only way to do more with less
is to actually… _do less_. Whenever I’m confronted with a new project, problem,
bug, or vision, I go through the same set of steps to try to make sure we’re
getting the most value out of the least expended energy.

## Delegate

I don’t mean this in the passing-the-buck sense; I think delegation is critical
to scaling yourself. At Meta, nothing is someone else’s problem—but that isn’t
to say that you are the best person to _solve_ every problem.

Whenever a new project lands on my doorstep, one of the first things I ask is:
is there someone else who can do this better than—or at least as well as—myself?
It might be that the project would benefit from a specific skillset or
historical context I don’t have; or it could be that the project would be a
great opportunity for someone else to _gain_ new skills or experience.

Understanding why you were selected and helping the team objectively evaluate
the needs from your role can help identify the right person for the job, whether
or not it’s you.

## Descope

Projects that don’t begin with all the necessary functional roles filled often
end up ballooning in scope. When the functional roles are filled and the work is
actually happening, one of two things (or both) tend to happen:

1. The project faces delays since elements of it are technically hard or
   impossible to deliver
2. The project is artificially scoped down in real time in order to release an
   MVP, or minimum _viable_ product, which fails to deliver the core promise of
   the idea

Instead, spend the time to challenge the scope of the work to distill the
minimum **valuable** product and make _that_ the initial milestone. This
exercise allows your team to deliver something of value _quickly_, learn from
that work and adjust the ambitious plan accordingly.

## Parallelise

If we really want to move fast, no person on a project should be left feeling
“blocked” while they wait for the work of someone else. In product design, we’re
often asked for “final designs” to provide to engineers so that they can begin
coding. But at large companies, “final designs” often have to go through
rigorous review cycles, from design system teams, product reviews, and one or
more groups of executives. In my experience, this way of working presents
several failures:

1. It creates animosity between designers and engineers, where designers feel
   rushed to provide something airtight in impossible timelines, and engineers
   feel frustrated that designers are slowing their progress down
2. It produces unrealistic designs and back-and-forth between designers and
   engineers at build time. As products are built in code, new constraints are
   encountered that invalidates designs and causes the team to pause and
   re-litigate decisions.
3. It creates design review processes that are somewhat detached from reality.
   When design reviews precede any engineering progress, it means that whatever
   design is approved by executives will always mismatch the actual, built
   product.

Instead, _insist_ that engineers begin prototyping based on the knowledge you
have of which parts of the product are absolutely essential. Think about the
data types, the creation and management of those types, the privacy and
integrity requirements, and even the novel interactions that you _know_ you want
to explore, and have engineers build those pieces as part of what I would call
“design discovery”.

This parallelising of design and engineering means that designers can adapt to
constraints encountered by engineers _during_ the design process, and not
_after_ designs have already been approved by reviewers. This results in less
time spent revising work, more realistic designs, and more accurately-built
products.

## Time-box

> “Money is circulated. Time is spent.” _— Frank Chimero_

Your time is your most precious and finite resource. Work has a tendency to fill
the time allotted to it. This can actually be helpful for accomplishing the
three above approaches, if you know how to spend your time wisely.

A small change you can make to begin practicing these behaviours is being
judicious in limiting your availability for projects. For example, telling your
partners on a new project that you can only dedicate a certain number of hours
per week to a project, and sticking to it. Whether it’s through 1-hour long
calendar blocks you use to focus on a specific project, or hosting office hours
where people can come and ask you for tactical guidance, this limiting can be
helpful for both descoping work and parallelising progress.

It will also leave you with a greater sense of control if you—rather than your
work—are the master of how your time is spent.
