import { Metadata } from "next"
export const metadata: Metadata = {
    title: "Thinking Is Work",
    description:
        "I’ve spoken with a lot of folks recently about a challenge imposed on us by increased remote work: losing time to think. Because of an increased need to communicate and align with peers and teammates—and few, ineffective tools for doing so (video-conferencing meetings and documents)—we find ourselves spending more time communicating than executing and, more critically, thinking about work.",
}

I’ve spoken with a lot of folks recently about a challenge imposed on us by
increased remote work: losing time to think. Because of an increased need to
communicate and align with peers and teammates—and few, ineffective tools for
doing so (video-conferencing meetings and documents)—we find ourselves spending
more time communicating than executing and, more critically, thinking about
work.

I can’t speak for everyone, but for Product Designers, my experience with flow
of work is that it requires three distinct phases:

1. Thinking
2. Executing
3. Communicating

My best work happens when I can dedicate 50%, 30%, and 20% of my time to these
phases respectively; but this has become almost impossible.

Remote work has necessitated a sharp increase in the time we spend
communicating, since we have fewer opportunities to do this serendipitously
(bumping into colleagues in between meetings or at our desks). Of course, the
tactical work still has to _happen_, and many of us feel an acute sense of guilt
when we’re not at our computers _executing_: doing the things we say need doing
in our communications.

I’m sure I’m not alone in feeling the costs of these changes: my days are
dominated by meetings to communicate, peppered with small blocks to execute, and
the only time I have left to think is after my workday ends. By the time I’m
sitting down for dinner with my family, my brain is still at work.

## Cooperative Thinking

Having lost the serendipitous opportunities for collaboration that come with
shared office space, we have to more intentionally create these spaces and
change the way that we think about meeting purpose and structure. Something I’ve
observed in my own team is that when we can co-locate phases of work—thinking,
execution, and communication happening all at once—it dramatically improves our
efficiency and morale.

Practically speaking, this has meant having a 45-minute meeting once a week
where our design team meets with key partner designers and works cooperatively
in a Figma file on a shared problem. This has several benefits:

-   Communication cycles are cut down or removed altogether, since key
    stakeholders are participating in real-time in the development of solutions
-   Execution is distributed amongst participants, lowering execution tax on
    individuals and generating more output
-   Thinking is aided by inviting more diverse thought from a wider group, often
    resulting in more creative solutions than individuals can produce alone

Finding more opportunities to colocate these phases of work is a powerful way to
free up time for individual focus.

## Solitary Thinking

If we’re able to reclaim time by colocating phases of thinking, executing, and
communicating with others, how do we capitalise on that time? Work expands to
fill the time allotted to it, so we have to act quickly and with intention to
plan for solitary thinking.

I have no silver bullets for this kind of work, since everyone’s circumstances
are different: many of us may still be feeling like we’re figuring out how to
work from home, overlapping with other household members or coping with new,
limited social contact. But in all cases, I strongly recommend time away from
screens to think.

Even performing menial errands like putting on a load of laundry, or extending
your lunch time to take a 30-minute walk can grant the away-from-screen time we
need to limit distractions and process information. The important thing is to
remember that **thinking is work.** Try to let go of the guilt associated with
not being tethered to a screen and recognise that in many modern workplaces,
knowledge is the primary capital, and processing that knowledge can only be done
by one tool: your brain. Give your brain the time it needs to do the thing that
Mother Nature spent billions of years designing it for: thinking.

## Time Is Finite

Research has shown that consistently getting less that 8 hours of nightly sleep
can have detrimental effects on our health, emotional state, and capacity to
work and learn. After 10 consecutive days of just 7 hours of sleep a night, we
suffer a similar loss of brain function as individuals who stay awake for 24
hours straight[^1]. Even taking a short nap in the afternoon can help the brain
relocate newly learned information from the hippocampus, where short-term
memories are banked, to the cortex, where facts are more permanently stored for
later retrieval, increasing our capacity for new information later in the
day[^2].

It is entirely reasonable to set a schedule so that in 24 hours, 8 hours are
spent sleeping, 8 hours are spent working, and 8 hours are spent living. Any
work that can’t be achieved in 8 hours can—must—wait until the next day.

When asking others to commit to work, it’s important to bear this in mind too.
Many of us are already at our limits, filling our 8 hours (often more than) with
specific tasks. We can’t afford to append items: there must be a tradeoff. Be
straightforward in setting expectations both when setting and delivering work:
get comfortable setting commitments like “I can spend two hours on this” and
sticking to those commitments by scheduling time specifically for them.

Thinking is work. It’s about time we remember it more often.

[^1]: https://learn.g2.com/sleep-and-productivity
[^2]: https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article/43/9/zsaa058/5813764
