import Image from 'components/Image'

export const frontmatter = {
title: "Making Sense",
layout: "post",
date: "2014-11-02"
}

# Making Sense

<Image src="2014/10/Muji-Aluminium-Pen.png" />

There is both a great pleasure and a great ache in the search for well-made
products. Products that are lasting and unambiguous. This search is what leads
us to products like those from companies such as Apple or Muji. Things that are
beautiful and considered, through and through, thorough to the last and smallest
detail. And it’s the same search that drives companies like Apple and Muji to
pursue that achievement; a discontent with the now, in favor of _the better_.

The search, for the designer, is a cleansing one. “Better” is, more often than
not, the dispelling of complexity until the product is as simple as possible,
but no simpler[^1]. Design is more to do with the process of how one might
remove features, functions, and flourishes, than it is about the resulting
output. Design is a verb.

The simplicity, then, of products such as the MacBook, or the iPhone, or Muji’s
humble aluminium pencil (pictured above) is no accident or chance occurrence.
And the more I think about the products myself or others around me use every
day, the more connected I feel to and enamoured with the designers behind them.

I’m writing this in Sublime Text, which was probably designed by Jon Skinner,
the app’s developer. The theme I’m using was probably the result of years of
separated collaboration and the consequence of many makers minds. The typeface
I’m writing with (Input Mono) was designed by David Jonathan Ross, who no doubt
was influenced by at least a handful of type designers for this typeface alone.
Add to that the years of education and the fine minds behind centuries of
typographic knowledge and you’ve got a long family tree.

The MacBook I’m writing on was designed by Sir Jony Ive and his small team of
industrial designers. They worked long hours for months at a time to produce
this computer. They tested iteration after iteration of keyboard springiness,
trackpad smoothness, chassis design, corner radius, hinge resistance, and input
positioning. Before this model, they had the same rigorous testing for the
previous model, and they’ll have even more for the next one. And the same
testing for every other product they have ever shipped.

Ive and his team no doubt draw influences from a number of other designers, who
in turn draw influence from yet more. These generations of designers go back
centuries upon centuries, and yet “Design” in the public’s eye is still a very
wishy-washy and usually visual thing. A lacquer.

But then, it’s not in the designer’s interest to necessarily recieve praise or
acclaim for their work, because their work is never done. As long as there are
new things being learned and created, there will always be opportunity to make
sense of it, and that job lies largely in the lap of the designer.

The kind of “Design” that comes to the mind of the general public is that which
sits delicately in the overlap of Art and Design[^2]. Things that make sense and
have done for years, but that provide a canvas for customisation. Things from
mugs and plates to tshirts and cars and houses. The blueprints for these
products remain largely unchanged. A handled container. A ceramic disk. An
oblong structure. I’ve no doubt that many would argue that a world without the
kind of customisation you see in these objects is a grim and lifeless one, but
it’s one I dream of and inactively strive for.

Customisation is, really, a form of complexity. Opinionated design has the
advantage of simplicity. You get what you get and nothing more. There are fewer
moving parts; fewer opportunities for a product to buckle and break, provided
the blueprint is matched, and matched in a well-built way.

Opinionated design also encourages greater creativity than customisations.
Customisations are often themselves prefabricated. By following simpler
blueprint design, there’s less resistance against the creations of the user or
customer.

In light of this (no doubt drab and depressing for some) realisation, Vitsœ’s
ethos comes to mind. “Living better, with less, that lasts longer.” Applying
that filter to the things you buy results in an interesting pattern. Things with
real density. Things stripped of pomp and frills. Things that are both very
clearly present, and yet almost invisible until you need them. Things that don’t
cry for attention. Living with this attitude also opens the floodgates for an
appreciation of the things we most take for granted, and the people who designed
them.

Products that are simple and unambiguous make sense. They provide clarity and
consistency that unlocks a life of fulfilment and completeness. And they empower
myself and others like me to do what we must; continue making things that make
sense.

[^1]: This is, of course, a quote from Albert Einstein. Einstein was no

designer—at least not by trade—but he was certainly onto something here. [^2]:
Or, more realistically, in the overlap of Art, Design, and Advertising
