import Image from 'components/Image'
import Align from 'components/designSystem/Align'

export const frontmatter = {
layout: "post",
title: "Design Elitism",
date: "2014-06-28"
}

# Design Elitism

About 3 years ago, I was standing on a stage, delivering a presentation about
animation, design, and delight on the web. It was wretchedly terrifying, but
ultimately successful and liberating.

This was an exciting time for me. I was attaining knowledge about digital design
at a very rapid pace; not so much the things I learn today at
Dropbox—collaboration, iteration, and criticism—but more about design’s role in
digital media, its misunderstandings, and the challenges that design was facing
and solving in what was still a very young space.

Things have changed a lot since then. I haven’t given any more presentations,
but I have been doing a lot more observing. Design in the digital space has
grown up, and during that maturation, it’s developed an attitude. A rotten one.
Digital design has, unbeknownst to the majority of us, turned into a repulsive
facade and bewilderingly powerful buzzword.

<Align.Left>
<Image src="2014/10/eames-plastic-armchair.png" caption="The [Eames molded
  plastic armchair](http://www.vitra.com/en-it/product/eames-plastic-side-chair#)
  is the result of years of refinement, and will last for many years yet as both a
  functional artifact and a timeless design." />
</Align.Left>

In the digital realm, “design” seems to have become a catch-all term for a lot
of things. That’s not an inherent problem, but the consequence of the overuse
and underthinking of design has led to people—generally those lacking
understanding of design—to accept it as a mythical, inaccessible process through
which decisions are made, which, in any other setting, would be inappropriate.

The observation of this manipulation of design as a term is made through the
lens of someone quite suddenly dropped into the petri dish of modern technology,
San Francisco. In this bizarre city and the surrounding Bay Area, everyone is a
designer. _Everyone_. And not in the “everyone can design” sense, but rather
“everyone _does_ design.” Decisions are made without apprehension of
consequence. Questionable devices are broadcast, and when eyebrows are raised,
design is used as the go-to rationalisation for poor decisions and broken
philosophies.

It’s through this bizarre design elitism that things like
[Yo](http://www.justyo.co) garner so much rabid attention and absurd funding.
For those who aren’t yet acquainted[^1], Yo is an app that does one thing: it
sends a one-word message—“Yo”—to your contact(s) of choice. It’s novel, silly,
and immediately disposable.

And it managed to raise $1,000,000. A million dollars.

One million US dollars is about 60% of what the average United Kingdom citizen
will earn in their 87-year[^2] lifetime. Of course, the first 21 years are spent
in diapers and education—sometimes both—and don’t really count. That means that
in around 39 ½ years, one British human will earn as much money as an app did in
just a few days.

There is credit due to the creators of Yo for such a virally engaging app of
such a high level of simplicity, but the investors seem to have become blind to
the temporal nature of the virality of these things. You see, in Investorland,
and particularly in Digital Investorland, design is the only currency that
matters. Yo’s apparent success was contingent upon its ease of use and its
insane simplicity—regardless of blatant and [glaring security
issues](http://mashable.com/2014/06/20/yo-gets-hacked/)—and in a world where
design is King, simplicity is all it takes to make several otherwise mentally
sound adults go temporarily insane and throw literal fistfuls of money at
whatever product happens to grace their inbox that morning.

If you can excuse my digression, there is a point to be made here. design has
made a name for itself beyond traditional 2D graphic and print design, but at a
severe cost; it has permeated the mainstream of investors and consumers alike,
and as a result, has become a tacked-on word with connotations of immediate
value and thoughtfulness.

Consumers know that Yo, like iOS, and more recently, Android, is designed. They
know that through exposure to media sources headlining “Company launches
redesign.” They know it through social channels and financial reports. Design
has, through these high-bandwidth channels, become a frontman for countless
devices, companies, apps, and brands. And that’s not really what I got into
design for.

I became a designer because of the satisfaction of solving a tough problem.
Through the act of making something of use, and also striving to make that thing
beautiful and delightful[^3]. Since then, I’ve seen design in digital media
become a status symbol—a lacquer and finish tacked on to requisite interest. I’m
pleased to say that the people I work with strive for better solutions to tough
problems through design, and that is how design is upheld at Dropbox. This
design prominence is recognised by our customers. The simplicity of
Dropbox—which is not an attribute easily achieved when you consider the many
things besides saying “Yo” that Dropbox does to help us live and work—is one of
its most recognised features.

But what of the type designers? Where is the million-dollar funding for the
simplicity and exquisite form of a multi-lingual typeface? What of the designers
of newsprint and its various forms? What of the data visualisers of The New York
Times, The Guardian, and their ilk? What of the designers making it easier for
people to pay their taxes? The designers making the lives of those less
fortunate than ourselves just a little more enriched and fulfilling through
intelligent product design?

And what of the engineers optimising and speeding up processes and build times?
They, of all contributors, have the highest volume of impact on perceived
performance, and as a result, perceived design of a service. All these people
have fallen under the shadow of what is perceived by investors and consumers
alike as “design”—the ethereal, mystical process through which decisions are
made, which, in any other setting, would be inappropriate.

When news of a new app gaining monumental funding breaks, those who spend their
days kneading their brain to coax a thoughtful solution lament the thought of a
rabble of college graduates or tech bros—with little or no motivation or
compassion for solving universal problems through design—celebrating a weekend
hack that helps no one but themselves, their investors, and quite often a host
of advertisers.

This may all start to sound like jealousy and petty affairs, and it may well
be—but in a world where money is no object, there seems to be an awful lot of it
going to undeserving causes. Amongst the myriad issues facing the technology
industry—sexism, racism, and general exclusivity & elitism—design, as it is
known to the investors, has become an integral part of the reality distortion
field making technology such a volatile and inaccessible industry.

But when the tech bubble bursts—and it will—the investors and design elitists
will be picking up the leftovers. Meanwhile, the designer looks up from her
desk, peers through the window, and returns to the problems she so dearly loves
to solve.

[^1]: You lucky git. [^2]: Based on [2010 mortality

rates](http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/mortality-ageing/mortality-in-england-and-wales/average-life-span/rpt-average-life-span.html)
and [The Human Footprint](http://www.snagfilms.com/films/title/human_footprint).
[^3]: “Whoever said that pleasure wasn’t useful?”—Charles Eames
