import Image from 'components/Image'

export const frontmatter = {
layout: "post",
title: "The Weird Wide Web",
hero: "2016/08/www.png",
date: "2016-08-04"
}

# The Weird Wide Web

<Image src="2016/08/www.png" className="" />

From my “hotel desk” in Facebook’s New York office, I can see a handful of
different environments. A cluster of soft chairs for people to sit & work
situated on a grass-green carpet; a kitchen with chipboard walls and dozens of
coffee samovars, empty for the third time in two hours; and a forest of white
pillars bordering the desk space for this floor’s employees. But right by the
elevators, two of these columns are garishly different—painted from floor to
ceiling in a [Love Hearts](http://www.lovehearts.com/)-inspired gradient of
pastel colors, with interjections of clashing spray-paint scribbles.

The juxtaposing style predates a similar style which is becoming ever-present on
the web. It’s just one embodiment of a style known as “brutalist” design.
There’s no shortage of
[commentary](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2016/05/09/the-hottest-trend-in-web-design-is-intentionally-ugly-unusable-sites/)
on the [trend](http://brutalistwebsites.com/) floating around, but as its
prevalence[^1] continues, it becomes an increasingly interesting statement of
our place as designers for screens.

<Image src="2016/08/fbny.jpg" caption="Pillars in the Facebook New York office
echo a recent trend in web design" className="" />

Popular opinion is that brutalist web design emerged in response to the dominant
aesthetic of web design over the last half a decade; plainly-made websites with
white backgrounds and black text[^2]. If this conventional aesthetic web design
is Helvetica, brutalist web design is the web’s David Carson moment. Web
design—just like traditional graphic design before it, with oscillation between
Swiss design and “grunge” typography—is seeing a pendulum-like shift back to the
high-gloss ornamentation we saw with “Web 2.0”, and pushing it beyond comfort.
It serves as both an embrace and a gigantic “fuck you” to the skeuomorphic
design of yesteryear. _“Purposefully broken and ugly”_ is the rallying cry of
brutalist web design.

But what’s interesting to me about the efforts of the designers embracing this
style is that they’re simply employing tools that have otherwise never existed.
Web technology has come some way in the last few years, adding CSS
transformations and filters, native 3D rendering in browsers, and function
beyond styling, with access to device information, such as its orientation in 3D
space. Not only do web designers have access to tools and styles that
traditional graphic designers have known for years—layer-blending and (somewhat)
direct manipulation of layers—but we have _immediate_ access to these
techniques. With a Google search here and there, and a few lines of code, we can
produce 3D models with complex colors and shading, drop that into a previously
bland and unremarkable design, and completely change the experience of a
website. Not only that, but we can make it interactive, too, changing in
reaction to the viewer’s location, device, or interactions.

Whether these brutalist websites are trend-hopping or pure experimentation and
originality is besides the point; it’s extremely fun, and extremely easy. Web
designers and the Photoshop-toting designers of the early 2000’s used to ponder
about the “happy accidents” that traditional graphic design so often embraced.
Now, with new technologies, these accidents are mere keystrokes away. As our
tools become more powerful and abundant with features, it becomes increasingly
easy to happen upon one of these happy accidents. What used to be experiments
with new CSS features are becoming the portfolio pieces of designers settling
into a confusing and young medium. Whatever the [web’s
grain](http://www.frankchimero.com/writing/the-webs-grain/) looks like,
brutalist web design might be the fastest way to discover it.

There is, of course, a hugely self-serving characteristic of brutalist design.
Brands like Bloomberg exemplify it; a household name embracing a trend and
diverging from utilitarian convention might be good for enthusiastic designers,
but does the core readership suffer as a result? Do the same people reading
about stock prices and big business buyouts understand the subtle humor in a
design that throws garish gradients over [Tim Cook’s
face](http://www.fastcodesign.com/3036003/why-businessweeks-ugly-tim-cook-cover-is-subversive-genius)?
While designers are immersing themselves in the weird web and this new, broken
aesthetic, are we able to evaluate the lessons we learn?

If we aren’t learning anything from these experiments—and I suspect that’s
possible in a lot of cases—I still think that’s ok. The web is going through
some growing pains. Designing for the screen is different today than it was five
years ago, or even one year ago. We have to start worrying about immersive
virtual and augmented realities; we have to start worrying about screens that
can twist and bend and tear; we have to start worrying about a world with no
visual interfaces at all. It seems like preparing for those worlds means
throwing out the rulebook, making web and digital design a spectator sport, and
waiting to see what emerges as the victor.

[^1]:

  I confess, I even [jumped on the bandwagon](https://dribbble.com/shots/2725905-) myself.

[^2]: Guilty as charged.
