---
title: "The Landscape of Web Typography"

date: "2015-02-15"
---

## Preface

This post was originally drafted as a talk for CSSConf, which I sadly had to
back out of speaking at. In lieu of the talk itself, I thought I’d instead
publish a torrent of thoughts on the titled subject. And let's not ignore the
fact that this formatting may in fact be better, given its proximity to the
subject at hand. This will be read on a vast number of browsers, in people’s
hands and at their desks, and in anywhere between a few months and a few years,
many of the facts pointed out herein will be false or irrelevant. It’s an
exciting and frustrating time to be enthusiastic about typography on the web.
Let’s dig in.

## Introduction

Hi. For those of you who don’t know me, I’m [Daniel](http://daneden.me). Those
who do know me probably know me because of
[Animate.css](http://daneden.github.io/animate.css). Believe it or not, I do
work on things besides CSS animations. Most of that work is done at
[Dropbox](https://dropbox.com), where I’m a Designer. I also maintain
[Ragged Write](http://raggedwrite.net), a blog about typography (though I’m not
very good at that—type news is slow); [Onword](http://onword.co), a place to
write; and [Just My Type](http://justmytype.co), a collection of web font
pairings. I’ve also written about web type for
[Typecast](http://typecast.com/blog) a few times. In case you can’t yet tell,
I’m kind of into typography.

This obsession, combined with my curiosity with and attraction to the web,
naturally led me to the topic for my talk today. Being a typoholic on the web is
hard; as with layouts, we have the unpredictable nature of the web and its
various browsers dilly-dallying with our typographic styles, with discrepancies
both small and large across any number of platforms, devices, and screens. But
things have improved in recent years, and continue to do so daily. Here, I
thought it might be nice or interesting or scary to take a stock-check of
typography on the web as it exists today. Let’s go through this together.

## The State of The Union

Any Graphic Designers should probably get all of their laughter out of the way
while they can. The cold, hard truth is; typography on the web stinks. Let’s
take a look at today’s workflow. We’re going to design a website.

Unless I want to use Verdana, Georgia, Times New Roman, or Arial, my type
choices are pretty much restricted to those available through a number of
services. There’s Typekit, which is owned by Adobe and, well, smells like Adobe;
Fontdeck, which is admittedly not exactly a painless service due to it’s
pay-per-font restrictions which only work for corporations who are unlikely to
flex on their typographic choices; Google Fonts, which—though comprehensive—is
severely lacking in both features and quality; H&Co.’s Cloud.Typography[^1],
which has perhaps the best catalogue, though is out of many people’s budget and
comes with a performance penalty (500kb is about as small as you’ll get for a
good pairing from H&Co.); Adobe web fonts, which is basically just
Typekit/Google Fonts on Adoberoids; a multitude of other options which are
either too expensive or have far too high technical constraints and payloads;
and, last but not least, self-hosting. Don’t even get me started on the
complexities and caveats of self-hosting.

That’s a lot of choices. Are we having fun yet?

Let’s go with Typekit. It’s (relatively speaking) cheap, easy to set up, and has
limited control (which means limited opportunities for screw-ups.) Typekit has a
wonderful catalogue of typefaces from a vast array of foundries, two of which
you’re seeing here now—Leitura News and Franklin Gothic URW.

Once you pick your typefaces, you add them to a “kit.” Basically Typekit-speak
for a project. Then, you choose your weights, language support, and domain(s),
and you’re ready to go. Typekit gives you a code snippet to put in your site so
that you get your fonts. But it’s a JavaScript snippet, not a CSS link.

Even after this debacle, what are we left with? A ghost of a typeface; type
stripped of most of its OpenType features—things like true small caps,
case-sensitive punctuation, and ligatures—unless you opt for
performance-degrading delivery of fully-loaded font files[^2].

I’m dramatising a little here, but you get the picture. Things aren’t great. But
they’re a damn sight better than they were just a few years ago. When I was
first dabbling in web design, if I wanted to use a typeface that wasn’t “web
safe,” it meant one of two things: I’d be showing the user a picture (literally
an `<img>` in most cases) of that typeface, or I’d be using Cufón, which in its
prime used Flash (back when it was still Shockwave Flash) to display fonts. Just
thinking about that makes me weary.

## Doing Our Best With What We’ve Got

Ok, so things are grim, but they used to be a lot worse. What can we actually
_do?_ As it turns out, quite a lot. I told you I was dramatising earlier.

At the time of writing, Google Chrome is just about the only browser with which
you’ll be able to see it, but there are actually a number of great typographic
features in this post. If I were to talk for a moment about, say, CSS and HTML,
you’ll notice that Leitura News’ true small caps are coming into play. If I spit
out a number or a date like 18th February 1991[^3], you’ll see old-style figures
bobbing up and down along the baseline as opposed to Leitura’s default lining
figures, which sit neatly inline together.

This is the tip of the iceberg. In other typefaces, we could get alternates,
swashes, contextual ligatures, a spattering of numerical characters, and much
more. These are called OpenType features, and they’re what really takes a
typeface above and beyond vanilla typesetting. If I were even a little bit
cooler, this is where I’d say “These aren’t your mother’s fonts, guys.”

These features have been around for a long time in digital design. Adobe’s
Creative Suite has some pretty nice tools for working with OpenType features,
particularly InDesign. The fact that we have access to native OpenType features
on the web is really exciting. I’m not going to go into too much technical
detail, but Elliot Jay Stocks wrote up a
[really great overview](http://www.elliotjaystocks.com/blog/a-recap-on-opentype-features/).

## The Bad News

There is some bad news, sadly. Like I mentioned before, the only browser with
semi-comprehensive support for native OpenType features today is Google Chrome.
You’d think that Apple’s Safari would be leading the way here, having a staunch
history in the development of modern type rendering[^4], but Safari’s adoption
of CSS font properties beyond those specified in CSS 2.0 has been slow.

Speculation tells me adoption of these features is slow for a good
reason—performance. Everyone wants a fast web, but that can only really happen
if the way that pages and web apps render is easily predictable. The problem
with many OpenType features is that they can have a significant and
unpredictable effect on the appearance of type. Even simple ligatures—the
optical adjustments to sets or pairs of letters with conflicting letterforms
such as “fi” and “fl”—can quite significantly change the layout of text. On top
of all its other duties, the browser now has to deal with text that doesn’t
necessarily look the same as it expected, and what that means for text that’s
editable or selectable[^5].

I think we can all agree that it’s reasonable for us to calm down and remain
patient for browser implementations of OpenType features. Maybe.

Another interesting part of this problem to note is H&Co.’s solution to it. For
their Cloud.Typography service, they allow users deep-level controls over the
fonts that are delivered. They surface toggles for small caps, titling versus
old-style figures, ligatures, language sets, alternates, and all sorts. What
this means is that you can effectively duplicate fonts that exclusively carry a
certain OpenType feature (say, for instance, you want Whitney with small caps,
Cloud.Typography would let your site receive two font files: Whitney, and
Whitney all small-caps). The result is a total font payload that is
significantly larger in download size, but extremely flexible. Even for browsers
lacking support for true small caps, you could have HTML classes that use the
font that’s _all_ small caps instead.

---

Had I written about this just a few years ago, there would have been a much
stronger fire-and-brimstone undertone. Thankfully, I think we’re at the
epicentre of a typographic revolution on the web. We’ve been wallowing in the
vanilla typesetting mud for quite some time, and there’s a lot of exciting stuff
ahead of us.

Personally, I’m excited for a few things in particular: browser vendors are
working on implementing more typographic features, little by little; devices and
internet speeds are getting faster, meaning even our heavyweight font files will
get to more users in less time; and the services we entrust to deliver great web
fonts are constantly improving, making performance optimisations as well as
designing or cataloguing more comprehensive typefaces.

Sure, things aren’t great. But we’re well through the worst of it. Happy
typesetting.

[^1]:
    I’m not sure how to capitalise Cloud.Typography—seriously, is it all
    lowercase? CamelCase? Sentence case? Title Case? I have absolutely no idea
    so, please, if you know, let us all know.

[^2]:
    This has changed! I’m not sure exactly when, but Typekit moved the OpenType
    features outside of the opaque “Default” vs. “All characters” selection.
    Thank you, Typekit!

[^3]: That’s my birthday, for those who wondered.
[^4]:
    Together with Microsoft, Apple developed TrueType, one of the first—and most
    popular—font formats for digital type.

[^5]:
    I remember a particularly interesting and nasty bug in Google Chrome related
    to their implementation of kerning and ligatures. If you made a selection
    with your mouse over a ligature, the selected text would _appear_ to
    actually be text that was several characters or words away from the true
    selection. Digital text is hard to wrangle.
