export const metadata = {
    title: "Regex for Designers and UX Writers",
    description:
        "Learn the basics of Regex, a powerful tool for searching and replacing text using patterns.",
    openGraph: {
        title: "Regex for Designers and UX Writers",
        description:
            "Learn the basics of Regex, a powerful tool for searching and replacing text using patterns.",
        images: [
            {
                url: "/og/regex-for-designers-and-writers",
            },
        ],
    },
}

# Regex for Designers and UX Writers

Across all our digital devices, one of the things we probably do most commonly
is _search for something_. Whether it’s using Spotlight on our iPhone or Mac,
searching using the Windows menu, using Ctrl+F or ⌘+F to search for something in
a document, or looking something up on Google, we’re constantly finding our
stuff by searching with text.

Almost all text search is powered by a terse and powerful syntax called
**regular expressions** or _regex_. The idea behind regex is straightforward:
you use a sequence of characters to describe a search pattern. For example, if I
wanted to find the word “regex” in a document, the regular expression I would
write would look like this:

```regex
/regex/
```

The slashes at the beginning and end just indicate the beginning and end of a
regular expression. This specific pattern would match instances of the word
“regex”, but not “Regex”. If I wanted to make my search query match both of
these variants, there are two ways I could do it:

```regex
/[Rr]egex/
/regex/i
```

The first example above will match either an uppercase “R” or a lowercase “r”,
followed by the remaining part of the word, “egex”.

The second example above adds an “i” right after the closing slash. This “flag”,
as it’s known, indicates that my search should be _case insensitive_, meaning it
doesn’t matter whether the matching characters are uppercase or lowercase. This
means that even a spelling such as “ReGeX” would match my query.

The thing is, regex is useful not only for searching. It’s a powerful Swiss Army
knife, useful for doing all sorts of things with text: searching, replacing,
transforming, and validating different texts are just some of the ways that
regex is used every day.

As you can see, even searching for a single word can get quite complex when you
take into account the various ways that word could be formatted, and how strict
or loose we want our matches to be. In this post, I’ll highlight a number of
ways that regex can be useful, whether you’re building a prototype using
JavaScript, or trying to think about data validation or string replacement as a
content writer.

## Searching Spelling Variants

We saw in one of the earlier examples how we can match either lowercase or
uppercase letters, but regex gives us many other ways to look for characters:
characters that may or may not be in the text, characters that appear a certain
number of times, characters that are at the beginning or end of a text, or
characters that are of a specific type, such as numbers or white space.

As you can imagine, all these different capabilities allow you to write some
very powerful (and very intimidating) patterns. But don’t worry; once you know
what you’re looking at, regex can be quite easy to parse and understand.

Let’s say you’re writing a document about colour, and you realise partway
through that you really ought to have used the word “hue” instead of “colour”. A
simple find-and-replace in any good word processor will help you out with
this—but you’ve also been working with colleagues in different countries, some
of whom spell it as “colour” and others who spell it as “color”.

Our first task would be finding all the instances of the two variants for the
word “colour”, and regex lets us make the letter “u” optional, like this:

```regex
/colou?r/
```

This will look for both “colour” and “color” in our text. Once we’ve found those
matches, we can easily replace them all with the word “hue”.

It’s also possible to look for entire words. Let’s say some maverick decided to
add the word “chroma” instead of “colour”, which we also want to replace with
“hue”. We can use a “pipe” character (`|`) to indicate alternate matching
criteria:

```regex
/colou?r|chroma/
```

This query will match “colour”, “color”, and “chroma”.

Let’s add one more complication. Let’s say we only want to replace instances of
the word “colour” (or variants thereof) if they’re preceded by the words “red”,
“blue”, or “green”.

We can use a feature of regex called _capture groups_[^1] to look for and store
the word before “colour”. Let’s modify our query:

```regex
/(red|blue|green) (colou?r|chroma)/
```

Above, we now have two capture groups, indicated by parentheses. The first one
will match the words “red”, “blue”, or “green”; the second one will match
“colour”, “color”, and “chroma”; and both groups are separated by a space.
Matching those patterns is one thing, but now how do we replace the matches with
“hue” while keeping the colour’s name in tact?

When you use a capture group, you’ll get a reference to that group in
substitution. The reference is the number of the group in the order they’re
defined in the regex pattern. So to reference the first capture group with the
colour’s name, I could write the following _substitution regex_:

```regex
\1 hue
```

The backslash before the 1 indicates that I’m referencing a capture group from
my previous regex pattern[^2]. If the pattern finds the word “red” before
“colour” (or one of its variants), the substitution regex will replace the
entire match with “red hue”.[^3]

## Character Quantifiers

Besides searching text, another thing that regex is useful for is validating
that text meets a certain formatting requirement. A good example for this use
case would be making sure someone enters a valid telephone or credit card
number, or a valid post code.

Let’s start simple with this one. A valid credit card number, to my knowledge,
is 16 digits long. We’re going to ignore the fact that certain types of cards
start with certain digit sequences[^4], as well as ignoring spaces, so our regex
is very simple:

```regex
/\d{16}/
```

The `\d` above is called a _meta sequence_, which matches digits (numbers 0
through 9). There are many meta sequences in regex, including `\D`, which
matches _non-digit_ characters, and `\w`, which matches word characters
(alphanumeric characters).

The curly braces indicate a _quantifier_. In the case above, it means we want to
match 16 instances of digits. You could also specify a range of occurrences,
like so:

```regex
/\d{12,16}/
```

This would match a string of numbers between 12 and 16 digits long.

This range quantifier gives us another way to match against characters that may
or may not be there. In other words, the following regex patterns are
equivalent:

```regex
/colou?r/
/colou{0, 1}r/
```

We can put together our knowledge of capture groups and quantifiers to match
something more complicated. Let’s create a regex pattern to match against UK
telephone numbers.

We’ll make our regex support three common ways of indicating a UK telephone
number. UK numbers can start one of three ways:

-   With a leading `0`, followed by 10 digits. This is the common format for
    calling UK numbers within the UK.
-   With a leading `+44`, the international dialling code for UK numbers,
    followed by 10 digits.
-   With a leading `0044`, which is the international dialling code for devices
    that don’t support dialling with a `+` or other non-numeric characters.

So our regex needs to look for “0”, “+44”, or “0044”, followed by 10 digits:

```regex
/(0044|0|+44)(\d{10})/
```

Note that we put the `0044` first in the capture group. This is because regex
will stop at the first match in a capture group or pattern. If we made `0` first
in the capture group, then a number like 00441234567890 would first capture the
first `0`, and then find 13—rather than the expected 10—following digits. For
this reason, we put the more-specific criteria in a capture group first.

By capturing the 10 digits after the dialling code, we’re able to standardise
the numbers with the following format:

```regex
+44\2
```

Where `\2` is referencing the second capture group, which contains the
significant 10 digit telephone number.

There’s one more thing about quantifiers worth pointing out. It’s possible to
look for an unlimited number of character occurrences. Here are a couple of ways
to look for unlimited numbers of characters:

```regex
/\w+/
/\w{1,}/
/\w*/
/\w{0,}/
```

The first two patterns above will match _between **one** and unlimited_ word
characters (alphanumeric characters and underscores); whereas the second two
patterns will look for _between **zero** and unlimited_ word characters. Notice
that when using the curly brace quantifier (`{a, b}`), the first number is the
lower bound, and the second number is the upper bound. In our examples above,
the upper bound is missing, which tells regex to set an unlimited upper bound.

## Using Regex in The Real World

We’ve learned enough about regex to be dangerous, but all our examples have been
fairly abstract. You might be wondering, if you’re not a programmer, where can
you use regex?

Google’s productivity suite has support for regex in the find and replace
dialogs, although only Google Sheets supports capture groups for replacing text.
The version of regex used in their productivity suite uses `$` instead of `\` to
reference capture group values.

<Image
    alt="The “Find and Replace” dialog in Google Sheets, with the “Search using regular expressions” option turned on"
    caption="You can use regex in Google Docs and Google Sheets’ “Find and Replace” dialog"
    height={1180}
    src="/2019/11/sheets-regex.png"
    width={1276}
/>

Next time you’re looking for something in a Google Doc or Sheet, consider
toggling the regex feature on and using it to formulate more powerful searches.

If you’re building a prototype in JavaScript or Typescript (for instance, using
[Framer X](https://www.framer.com/)), you can use regex to validate input
values:

```js
// Replace “Hello world” with “Goodbye world”, using a capture group
"Hello world".replace(/Hello (world)/, "Goodbye $1")

// Validate whether an input value matches a pattern
const emailRegex = /[a-zA-Z0-9_+-.]+@[a-zA-Z0-9-]+\.[a-zA-Z0-9-]/
emailRegex.test(input.value)
// Returns true or false
```

You can also just think of regex as a useful tool for thinking about pattern
matching and validation, especially when working with engineers. Since regex is
such a powerful tool, it’s available in almost all programming languages.
Engineers and data analysts often use regex, and adding even some surface-level
knowledge about how regular expressions are written to your toolkit as a
designer can strengthen your working relationship with the people who use it.

---

This post might not have made you a regex expert, but hopefully it has
illuminated some of the uses for regex, and made it a little more
understandable—and while you might not find applications for it in your
day-to-day work, you may never think about humble Google searches or
find-and-replace the same way again.

[^1]:
    There are also _non-capturing groups_, which have a slightly different
    syntax: they open with `(?:` instead of just `(`. Capture groups have a
    simpler syntax, and allow us to reference the matching value later on.

[^2]:
    Depending on the language or editor you’re using, the reference character
    might be different. For example, in JavaScript or Go, you’d write `$1` to
    reference the first capture group, whereas in PHP or Python, you’d write
    `\1`.

[^3]:
    You can see this in action on
    [this regex101 example](https://regex101.com/r/iN2qOR/1). Try playing around
    with the match criteria and the test string!

[^4]:
    For example, Visa cards always start with a 4; MasterCard numbers always
    start with a 5 followed by a number between 1–5; Amex always starts with 34
    or 37. [This post](https://www.regular-expressions.info/creditcard.html)
    goes into regex patterns for credit card numbers in some depth, but be
    advised that the patterns therein are quite complex (though they use only
    the features of regex we’re covering here!).
