import { Metadata } from "next"
export const metadata: Metadata = {
    title: "It’s 2014 And Everything is Terrible",
}

6:30am. Wake up, thanks to the alarm on my iPhone. Check various inboxes, spread
across Gmail and iCloud. Read Twitter. Say hello to the people I love half way
across the world on Facebook.

Check Google calendar and iCloud calendar with Fantastical. Find out if I need a
jacket with iOS. Walk to work.

Write my blog posts in Editorially. Work with coworkers on Google Docs. Spend
time designing documents in Pages. Spend more time exporting all those words to
PDF and Word documents.

Walk home. Turn on the telly. Watch something on Netflix, via the Apple TV. Buy
a movie on iTunes. Wait 4 hours for it to start streaming. Buy a movie on Google
Play. Start watching it in Chrome, then send it to Chromecast.

Timeout error. Could not update. Sync failed. Weep softly.

---

The Difficult Disconnect of the Digital Age is a first world problem if there
ever was one. But let’s not let that stop us from talking about it, because it’s
important. It’s how we make progress.

This, being a design problem at heart, intrigues me. It’s actually quite a good
thing that no single company or service has pulled The Solution™ out of the hat;
it leaves room—and quite a lot of it, too—for innovation and competition. It’s
healthy. But it’s also damn frustrating.

What this really comes down to is a classification of edge cases. I’m sure
Johnny Appleseed—with his reliable, 100mb/s fibre optic broadband, bottomless
bank account, and freshly-ground coffee—gets on just fine with his life, without
a single second of technological frustration. He wakes up, thanks to his iPhone,
with his events perfectly synced with his colleagues (who just happens to be
using Microsoft Outlook 365 XP Platinum Edition Calendar to schedule and manage
his events), walks to work, jamming to “Whatever-Song-He-Wants” on iTunes Radio,
works collaboratively with iCloud documents, gets home, and puts on Disney’s
timeless classic, “A Movie”, on iTunes via his Apple TV.

But Sally Reality is having a harder day. Her patchy internet connection means
her events didn’t sync properly, but her phone didn’t let her know. She’s on her
way to work before she realises “Whatever-Song-She-Wants” isn’t on iTunes. Her
Editor is working in Google Docs, but she wrote everything in ByWord; yet her
Publisher needs PDFs. Frustrated, she gets home, buys a movie, and waits for it
to be ready to watch. The following evening.

In the eyes of Apple, Microsoft, or many other industry giants, Sally is having
a really hard day. Unfortunately, they’re looking through rose-tinted Google
Glass. Sally isn’t an edge case. She’s a typical case.

This is why we design. For you and me and Sally and Johnny. To make our lives,
and the lives of the people we love, hate, and those in desperate need easier.

I don’t expect the great disconnect to get any better any time soon. It will
take years of cooperation across the disparate companies and services, or
companies that strive—and succeed—to be the very best at something, and do it
really bloody well. Consistently, too. (Hint; I can think of at least
[one company](http://dropbox.com) in this category.)

Until then, let’s all keep working, sighing, and submitting to the gadget
overlords in our homes and pockets.
