import SolsticeTitle from "./SolsticeTitle"
import DeviceFrame, { DeviceModel } from "@/app/components/DeviceFrame"
import Video from "@/app/components/Video"
import "./styles.css"

<SolsticeTitle />

[Solstice](https://solstice.daneden.me) is a project that started with a simple
idea: what if I could see how much more or less daylight there is today compared
to yesterday? But simple ideas can be complex to build. I wanted to share this
deep dive into the work that went into making Solstice a powerful tool that’s
still simple to use.

## Overview

<DeviceFrame model={DeviceModel.iPhone14Pro}>
    <Video
        autoPlay={true}
        playsInline={true}
        poster="https://image.mux.com/wmuKWbZLNY2rHqcJWOaA7Ke2mfspU00021pYZPor6MTTE/thumbnail.webp?time=0"
        id={"wmuKWbZLNY2rHqcJWOaA7Ke2mfspU00021pYZPor6MTTE"}
        muted={true}
        loop={true}
    />
</DeviceFrame>

Solstice is built in SwiftUI and works on iPhone, iPad, macOS, and Apple Watch.
It’s privacy-sensitive by default, asking only for the permissions it needs
(approximate location) and works without access to your location unless you
explicitly grant permissions.

<Image
    src="/uploads/portfolio/solstice-devices.png"
    width={2120}
    height={2303}
    caption={
        <>
            Solstice works across iPhone, iPad, macOS, and Apple Watch, and
            features widgets, daily notifications, and Shortcuts support.
        </>
    }
/>

## Time Travel

One of Solstice's core features is Time Travel; the ability to compare today's
daylight to any other date. In the first version of Solstice, a slider was used
to allow quick time travel to dates in the past or future. This affordance is
easy to use, but imprecise: on smaller iPhone screens, individual days might end
up less than 1px apart on the slider, making it impossible to choose a specific
date. When I rebuilt Solstice, I knew from the start I wanted to allow choosing
a specific date.

<Image
    src="/uploads/portfolio/solstice-tt.png"
    width={1827}
    height={859}
    caption={
        <>
            The rebuilt Solstice app lets people choose specific dates, as well
            as quickly scrub to dates in the past or future using the slider
        </>
    }
/>

This meant the “Time Machine” for controlling time travel needs three
properties:

1. A reference date (the date we want to travel _from_—usually the current date)
2. A target date (the date we want to travel _to_)
3. An offset representing the number of days between the reference and target
   dates

To keep the offset in sync with the reference and target dates, it needs to be
its own computed value. Putting all this together, a simplified version of
Solstice's Time Machine looks like this:

```swift
@MainActor
class TimeMachine: ObservableObject {
    // The `isOn` property just indicates whether the Time Machine is active or not
    @Published var isOn = false
    @Published var referenceDate = Date()
    @Published var targetDate = Date()

    var offset: Binding<Double> {
        Binding<Double>(get: {
            Double(Calendar.current.dateComponents([.day], from: self.referenceDate, to: self.targetDate).day ?? 0)
        }, set: { newValue in
            self.targetDate = Calendar.current.date(byAdding: .day, value: Int(newValue), to: self.referenceDate) ?? self.referenceDate
        })
    }
}
```

The `referenceDate` is updated every minute in the app's main view using a
timer[^1] and/or when the app (re)enters the foreground. The whole class is also
run on the main thread thanks to the `@MainActor` attribute; this ensures the UI
remains responsive when the Time Machine changes, which is important: almost
everything on the screen is dependent on the Time Machine's dates.

There's one problem though; the hour, minute, and second components of the
reference and target dates can drift. If you open the app at 9am and set the
target date to some future date, when you reopen the app at 9pm, the app will
still show you data matching _9am on the target date_. To prevent this, we need
one last computed property to synchronise the time components of the reference
and target dates:

```swift
extension TimeMachine {
    var date: Date {
        guard isOn else { return referenceDate }
        let time = Calendar.current.dateComponents([.hour, .minute, .second], from: referenceDate)
        return Calendar.current.date(bySettingHour: time.hour ?? 0,
                            minute: time.minute ?? 0,
                            second: time.second ?? 0,
                            of: targetDate) ?? targetDate
    }
}
```

This code still leaves one quirk: when the `referenceDate` ticks over to the
next day, the `targetDate` has its time components set to the beginning of the
same day, but this “groundhog day” effect feels like it's actually expected
behaviour.

## Time Zones

In addition to comparing daylight at different times of the year, Solstice lets
you compare it in different locations around the world. It's impossible to build
an app that deals with time and location without running into the
[complexities of time zones](https://xkcd.com/1883/), and Solstice is no exception.

Furthermore, Solstice had the unique challenge of accurately representing dates and
times in a way that also let people jump to arbitrary dates in the past or future.

As a result, almost every reference to a Date value is passed through this function:

```swift
extension Date {
    func withTimeZoneAdjustment(for timeZone: TimeZone?) -> Date {
        guard let timeZone else { return self }
        let tzOffset = timeZone.secondsFromGMT(for: self) - TimeZone.autoupdatingCurrent.secondsFromGMT(for: self)
        return self.addingTimeInterval(TimeInterval(tzOffset))
    }
}
```

The function takes a time zone and returns the date adjusted for this time zone.
This helps prevent weirdness like a 2pm sunrise when you're looking at a
location 8 hours behind your own.

<Image
    src="/uploads/portfolio/solstice-tz.png"
    width={1827}
    height={914}
    caption={
        <>
            The time zone indicator in Solstice started as a helpful debugging
            tool and turned into one of my favourite little details
        </>
    }
/>

To help make sure my dates were working as expected, I added a time zone
indicator at the top of views for locations outside of my current time zone.
This debugging tool went on to become one of my favourite little details in the
app.

## Polar Days

<Image
    src="/uploads/portfolio/solstice-pd.png"
    width={3272}
    height={2998}
    caption={
        <>
            In locations close to the north or south pole, there might not be a
            sunrise or sunset. Distinguishing between 0 seconds and 24 hours of
            daylight is surprisingly hard.
        </>
    }
/>

In locations close to the north or south pole, there are periods of the year
during which the sun never rises or sets. In
[Solar](https://github.com/ceeK/Solar), the library used in Solstice to
calculate sunrise/sunset times, the time of the sunrise or sunset can sometimes
be `nil`. In the original version of Solstice, I often force-unwrapped these
values or fell back on an arbitrary date, leading to crashes or unexpected
behaviour in the app. When I rebuilt the app, I implemented a “safe”
sunrise/sunset value:

```swift
extension Solar {
    var fallbackSunrise: Date? {
        sunrise ?? civilSunrise ?? nauticalSunrise ?? astronomicalSunrise
    }

    var fallbackSunset: Date? {
        sunset ?? civilSunset ?? nauticalSunset ?? astronomicalSunset
    }

    var safeSunrise: Date { sunrise ?? startOfDay }

    var safeSunset: Date {
        if let sunset { return sunset }

        guard let fallbackSunset, let fallbackSunrise else {
            return endOfDay
        }

        // If the sunrise is over 7 hours from sunrise, it's safe to assume this is a 24 hour day of daylight
        if fallbackSunrise.distance(to: fallbackSunset) > (60 * 60 * 7) {
            return endOfDay
        } else {
            // Otherwise, it's safe to assume this is a day of no daylight
            return startOfDay.addingTimeInterval(0.1)
        }
    }
}
```

`fallbackSunrise` and `fallbackSunset` return the “edges” of a day’s daylight;
the moments when the sun begins or ends its journey above the horizon. Each of
the common, civil, nautical, and astronomical sunrise/sunsets represent
different degrees above or below the horizon and generally are calculable
values, but during polar days—days with either 24 hours or 0 seconds of
daylight—these times may not be calculable. To overcome this, the `safeSunrise`
and `safeSunset` values find the best approximate fallback values, based on the
distance between sunrise and sunset.

[^1]:
    I had explored using SwiftUI’s `TimelineView` for this update but found it
    degraded the app's performance.
