import { Metadata } from "next"
export const metadata: Metadata = {
    title: "Constraints & Affordances",
}

I spend a disturbing amount of time thinking about the way our world has come to
be. This morning, like most mornings, I took the tram to work. There was a
window in the driver's booth with a metal mesh over it - likely to prevent
foreign bodies finding their way into the compartment from the terrible streets
of Manchester. I started to wonder about the decisions made about that mesh. Who
decided on the size of the holes? Why did they come to that decision?

As these things naturally go, I found myself considering industrial design and
the choices involved in the production of things like chairs, vehicles, and
everything in between. The constraints that forced the designer's hand in the
decisions that let to the final product. Using particular paints or materials
because they're cheaper. The flat-pack furniture revolution, when companies (or
at least [one particularly popular company](http://ikea.com)) realised they
could cut costs for themselves and consumers by cutting out the assembly part of
furniture manufacture. Artists who create from very little.

And then I began to think about the constraints of the web. Or rather, the lack
thereof.

In the digital space, our resources are limitless. Our canvas is infinitely
large, and comes at no extra cost. We can be dangerously wasteful. The Internet
is our art supply shop. And our workshop. And our factory. Our toilet, our
bedroom, our office, and our In-n-Out. We lead such easy lives. What constraints
exist in this world? Certainly not one of resources. That leaves time and money.
But the web is cheap, and it's always on. Even those constraints are weak and
blurry.

And so we step back towards the traditional methods. We give ourselves limits
and borders. We only use one typeface. We make sure the site stays under size X.
We design mobile-first. We challenge. We make. Is it enough?

I doubt it. There's a deep longing in me. A need to make something real.
Something to hold and smell. A book. A print. A walking stick, for all I care.
It can be tiring creating something that can so easily vanish with a simple tap
of a keyboard. So I plan, and I practice for the day it's possible for me to
make. To craft. To feel the constraints of the situation, and to mould them into
a product.

I studied photography at [college](http://www.camsfc.ac.uk), which I thoroughly
enjoyed, not least because of how hands-on it would get. We'd spend hours in the
darkroom, come out stinking of chemicals and going through so many materials
just to get some kind of picture developed. Most of the time, the photograph
comes out nothing like you'd imagined. It's overexposed. Or there's so much dust
on the thing you couldn't tell it was taken in this century. But no matter how
bad the results, the time and care and process behind it gives it a worth so
profound that you share it with pride regardless of its artistic value. The
imperfections are a mark of our craft. We don't have that on the web.

There are no happy accidents. No overexposures. Mistakes are logged in version
control, or comments, but quickly shooed away. We're not brave enough. We strive
too hard for perfection.

Constraints encourage bravery and amplify value. Remain mindful of the decisions
you make - and most importantly, the mistakes you make.
