import { Metadata } from "next"

export const metadata: Metadata = {
    title: "Three Phases of Life for Design Systems",
    description:
        "Design systems can be an intimidating undertaking how can we create something that is robust and supports so many different needs? I’m here to tell you that the path you’re on is years long, but well worth it. Broadly speaking, your design system will undergo three phases of life reflection, anticipation, and influence.",
}

When asked in the past how to start a new design system, my response has usually
been some variation on “start anywhere”: the point being that if you’re at an
organisation large enough to merit an official design system, there’s likely
dozens of patterns already in use by your teams that simply need better guidance
and documentation.

As I’ve worked on and observed design systems evolve over the last 8 years of my
work, I’ve been able to see this tactic for starting design systems succeed time
and time again, but I’ve also been able to see more general phases of life for
design systems.

Design systems can be an intimidating undertaking: how can we create something
that is robust and supports so many different needs? I’m here to tell you that
the path you’re on is years long, but well worth it. Broadly speaking, your
design system will undergo three phases of life: reflection, anticipation, and
influence. It’s futile to try and rearrange these phases or skip the initial
ones, and each comes with its own benefits.

## Reflection

The primary goal of a fledgling design system is to reflect the world in which
it exists, acting as a mirror or map of the product it serves. This metaphor is
useful for a handful of reasons.

First, it sets an achievable goal for the first components and patterns in the
system. You’re not trying to do anything more complicated than simply reflecting
the components and patterns that people intuitively already know exist.

Second, it humbles your ambitions: _the map is not the territory_. Design
systems _can_ inspire new directions and design sensibilities, but you’re a long
way from doing this. First comes the work of building a reputation as a reliable
source of authority, and that comes by first reflecting the world as it is.

Third, it leaves room for change. Maps are constantly updated based on changes
to the landscapes or municipalities they represent. You need to get comfortable
with the notion that the design system is _always eventually wrong_. Listen to
the needs of the teams you support, help them get to good results faster, and be
prepared to be proven wrong.

The other important thing to remember is that in the minds of your customers—and
the teams within your organisation—_the design system already exists._ It’s
whatever the product is made up of, regardless of whether there’s a team
actually trying to make it more cohesive or consistent. Reflect this existing
world, reducing redundancies and simplifying complexity, and you’ll have a
design system in no time.

## Anticipation

After a while, the design system will accurately reflect the best parts of the
product. Documentation becomes more robust, and your team better understands why
certain components and patterns are the way they are. Once your design system
reaches this point, you can begin to be able to _anticipate_ the emerging needs
of the teams you support.

This might happen because you start to hear the same kinds of feedback about the
design system from different teams, or you might see teams naturally gravitating
towards new design styles or interaction patterns. However it happens, you can
start to use the good credit you’ve established as a reliable source of truth to
bring those teams together and co-create solutions.

This makes _reflection_—the core responsibility of a component library—easier,
since you’re in the room as product design solutions are being developed. You
can challenge any solutions with the same kinds of questions of scale that you
have to ask when adding new components to the library.

Anticipation takes practice, and a useful tool for any design system
representative to employ in their daily practice is the
[Reference Interview](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reference_interview). From
Wikipedia:

> A reference interview is a conversation between a librarian and a library
> user, usually at a reference desk, in which the librarian responds to the
> user's initial explanation of his or her information need by first attempting
> to clarify that need and then by directing the user to appropriate information
> resources.

In that same Wikipedia article is a fantastic summary of a Librarian’s role[^1]
(emphasis mine): “Our core skills are the skills and competencies required to
_improve the quality of the question_.”

I see the responsibility of design systems representatives in much the same way:
helping other product teams more deeply understand the problems they’re trying
to solve at scale—improving the quality of the questions they ask.

## Influence

After successfully anticipating the needs of teams you support and working with
them to extend the design system, you begin to take on more of a role of
influence in the organisation.

I almost called this phase “Innovation”, since there’s a lot of it at this
level. You might be innovating new design and interaction patterns, or exploring
technical advances to set new standards for how components get built.

But innovation is only successful if it persuades bigger change—if it
_influences_ people around it to shift their thinking.

All the good credit and reputation you’ve been accruing through reflecting the
product and anticipating the needs of others is exercised here. On Meta’s Ads
and Business Design Systems team, we had a snappy mission: “Make every designer
a systems designer”. This spoke directly to the kind of behavioural shift we saw
as the end-goal of our work.

Because the design system is always eventually wrong, how do we scale ourselves?
By helping others develop and use the same mental tools we use to audit,
reflect, and evolve a design system. All the artefacts you develop for a design
system—components, patterns, documentation, APIs, quality enforcement tools—are
_proxies for ways of thinking_ about product design and development at scale. By
being transparent about your process for developing a system, you help others
develop the same ways of thinking, and begin to think about more lateral
shifts—such as big rebrands, or tech stack changes—in similar terms.

---

In my experience so far, Influence is the peak of design system maturity, and
represents a design system that is federated across the organisation in such a
way that all product teams feel empowered to shift the system to meet emergent
problems. Even so, it’s crucial for design systems teams to remain nimble and
mindful of the fact that the system is always eventually wrong. Your first job
as a service team is to be responsive to the needs of the organisation: even if
it means redrawing the map.

[^1]:
    [“Special Library Reference Interviews: Basics of a Neglected Professional Skill”](https://lucidea.com/blog/special-library-reference-interviews-basics-of-a-neglected-professional-skill/)
